14 No. 28 HI V and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008 2008

PrO- 20. The Ministry shall, in collaboration with other ministries prepare

EITMCS programmes and conduct training for persons living with HIV and

survival, AIDS on-

life skills (a) their survival needs;

and. . (b)1ife skills; and

palllatlve _ . .

services (0) formation of support groups for the purpose of prov1d1ng
palliative services and care.

Ptevenu'on

of trans- 21,-(1) Any person who has knowledge of being infected with HIV

miSSion after being tested shall-

(a) immediately inform his spouse or sexual partner of the fact;
and

(b) take all reasonable measures and precautions to prevent the
transmission of HIV to others.

(2) The person referred to under subsection (1) shall inform his
spouse or his sexual partner of the risk of becoming infected if he has
sex with such person unless that other person knows that fact.

(3) Any person who abuse his spouse or sexual partner either verbally,
physically or by conduct in connection with compliance with the provisions
of this Act commits an offence and shall upon conviction be liable to a
ﬁne of not less than ﬁve hundred thousand shillings and not exceeding
one million shillings or to imprisonment for a term of not less than three
months and not more than six months or to both.

Prevention 22. The Ministry Shall-

contml (a) ensure that STIs services are strengthened; and

of STIs (b) create public awareness on STIs as far as it relates to
transmission of HIV and AIDS.

Condoms 23.-(1) The Ministry shall quantify requirement of condoms in

Tanzania by espousing different stakeholders, mobilizing resources
required for procurement of condoms generally with a view to ensuring
availability of condoms of standard quality in Tanzania.

(2) No condoms shall be manufactured or imported to Tanzania unless
the condoms conform with the standards provided by the Tanzania Bureau
of Standards and where possible, the condoms should bear the
information relating to the condoms and be in braille print.

