No. 28 HI V and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008

PART VIII
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATons OF PERSONS LIVING WITH HIV AND AIDS

33.—(1)Any person living with HIV and AIDS shall using available
resources have -

(a) a right to the highest attainable standard of physical and
mental health; and

(b) a right to treatment of opportunistic infections.

(2) Any person living with HIV and AIDS shall, subject to the
provisions of subsection (1), have an obligation to-

(a) protect others from infection; and
(b) share in scientiﬁc advancement and its beneﬁts.

34.—(1) Every local government authority, shall design, formulate,
establish and coordinate mechanisms and strategic plans for ensuring
that the most vulnerable children within its respective area are afforded
means to access education, basic health care and livelihood services.

(2) The Minister may, in consultation with the Minister responsible
for local government, make regulations setting out criteria for identifying
the most vulnerable children referred to under subsection (1).

(3) For the purpose of this section, the term “most vulnerable children”
includes orphans.

35.-(1) Every body corporate, NGO, CBO, FBO public institution
or Private Organization and any person receiving aid or other kind of
assistance for the purpose of providing preventive, research, treatment,
support or care to persons living with HIV and AIDS, widows, widowers,
orphans or the most vulnerable chidren shall ensure that the aid and
assistance received is used for that purpose.

(2) Any body corporate, NGO, CBO, FBO or Private Organization
which misuses any aid shall be liable on conviction—

(a) in case of an individual, to imprisonment for a term of not
less than three years and not exceeding ﬁve years or
conﬁscation of property worth the value of the aid or
assistance received and refund of the misused funds;

(b) in case of an NGO, CEO or FBO Private organization a
body corporate, to a ﬁne of not less than ﬁve million shillings
and not exceeding ﬁﬁy million shillings or conﬁscation of

propert woﬁh the value of aid or assistance received and
refund of the misused funds.

2008 17

Rights
and
obligations
of
persons
living
with HIV/
AIDS,
orphans,
etc.

Access to
education
and basic
health
care
services

Prohibi-
tion of
misuse of
aid by
NGOs,
FBOs,
CBOs, in
public
institutions
etc.

