20 No. 28 HI V and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008 2008

I . . _
tion of
research
ﬁndings

Monitor-
ing

Reporting
by health
care
facility

Diagnoses
and
reporting

Offences
relating
to breach
of
conﬁden-
tiality

(b) where that other person is a child, there is informed consent
of a parent or legal guardian of the child.

(3) For the purpose of subsection (2), a person whose consent is
sought to be obtained, shall be adequately informed of the aims, methods,
anticipated beneﬁts and potential hazards and discomforts of the research.

(4) The person who is the subject of the research shall be adequately
provided with compensation as far as ethical regulations are concerned.

42 .-( 1) The public and private instututions shall maintain inventory of all
on going and completed research projects on HIV and AIDS and TACAIDS
shall compile and disseminate relevant research ﬁndings to the public.

(2) For the purpose of facilitating dissemination of research ﬁndings
under this Part, researchers shall translate or cause to be translated research
ﬁndings into Kiswahili and English languages for public consumption.

(3) Research ﬁndings shall be in appropriate format and technologies
accessible to disabled persons.

PART X
MONITORING AND EVALUATION

43. The Ministxy shall establish a comprehensive system of monitoring
and evaluation mechanisms to determine the magnitude and progression
of HIV infections and other matters relating to HIV and AIDS.

44. Every owner, manager or the incharge of a health care facility shall
adopt measures issued by the Ministry to ensure the reporting and
conﬁdentiality of any medical records and personal data relating to HIV and
AIDS including all information which may be accessed from various data.

45.-( 1) Every institution, hospital, laboratory, clinic and blood bank in
the Regions and Districts shall be required to diagnose and report HIV
and AIDS cases to the Ministry.

(2) The information referred to under subsection (1) shall be submitted
to TACAIDS for inclusion in the HIV and AIDS Monitoring and

Evaluation Framework.

PART XI
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

46. Any health practitioner or any person referred to under section
16 and 17 who—

(a) breaches medical conﬁdentiality; or

