12 N0. 28 HI V and AIDS ﬂ’revention and Control) 2008 2008

Coun-
selling

Prohibi-
tion of

mﬁsuy
HIV

testing

Test
results

14. Any person who is the owner, manager or incharge of a testing
center shall ensure that the center is physically accessible by disabled
persons and there is a trained and authorized person to provide pre and
post HIV test counselling to a person undergoing HIV test, and where

feasible, to any other person likely to be affected by the results.

15,-(1) Every person residing in Tanzania may on his own motion
volunteer to undergo HIV testing.

(2) A child or a person with inability to comprehend the result may
undergo HIV testing after a written consent of a parent or recognized

guardian.
(3) A person shall not be compelled to undergo HIV testing.

(4) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (3), no consent
shall be required on HIV testing-
(a) under an order of the Court;
(b) on the donor of human organs and tissues; and
(c) to sexual offenders.

(5) Every pregnant woman and the man responsible for the pregnancy
or spouse and every person attending a health care facility shall be
counselled and offered voluntary HIV testing.

(6) All health practitioners, traditional and alternative health
practitioners, traditional birth attendants and any other person attending
patients shall be encouraged to undergo HIV testing.

(7) Any health practitioner who compels any person to undergo
HIV testing or procures HIV testing to another person without the
knowledge of that other person commits an offence.

(8) Without prejudice to the preceding subsections, a medical
practitioner responsible for the treatment of a person may undertake
HIV test in respect of that person without the consent of the person if-

(a) the person is unconscious and unable to give consent; and

(b) the medical practitioner reasonably believes that such a test
is clinically necessary or desirable in the interest of that
person.

16.-(1) The results of an HIV test shall be conﬁdential and shall be
released only to the person tested.

