No. 28 HI V and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008

(b) unlawfully discloses information regarding HIV and AIDS
status of any person,

commits an offence, and on conviction shall be liable to a ﬁne of not less
than ﬁve hundred thousand shillings and not exceeding one million shillings
or to imprisonment for a term not less than six months and not exceeding
twelve months or to both.

47. Any'person who intentionally transmits HIV to another person
commits an offence, and on conviction shall be liable to imprisonment to

a term of not less than ﬁve years and not exceeding ten years.

48.—(1) Any person who intentionally breaches any provisions relating
to safe procedures and practices leading to spreading of HIV commits
an offence and on conviction shall be liable— ‘

(a) in case of an individual, to a ﬁne of not less than two hundred
thousand shillings and not exceeding ﬁve hundred thousand
shillings or to imprisonment to a term of not less than three
months and not exceeding six months; or

(b) in case of a health care facility, to a ﬁne of not less than
three million shillings and not exceeding ﬁve million shillings.

(2) The health care facility which is convicted pursuant to subsection
(1) may be deregistered from the Register of health care facilities.

49.—(1) It shall be an offence for any person to obstruct or prevent
any activity related to implementation of provisions of this Act in any
manner whatsoever.

(2) Any person convicted of an offence under this section, shall be
liable to a ﬁne of not less than one hundred thousand shillings and not
exceeding ﬁve hundred thousand shillings or to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding six months or both.

50. Any person, who commits any offence against the provisions of
this Act shall be liable on conviction for every such offence except wherein
any other section a speciﬁc penalty is provided to a ﬁne of not less than
two hundred thousand shillings or to imprisonment for a term of not less
than three months or to both such imprisonment and ﬁne.

2008 21

Offences
relating
to
spread-
ing HIV

Offences
relating to
breach of
safe
practices
leading to
spreading
HIV

Penalty
for
offence
relating
to

obstruction

General
penalty

