No. 28 HIV and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008

(3) Any person who contravenes the provisions of subsection (2)
shall, on conviction be liable in case of -

(a) an individual, to a ﬁne of not less than ten million shillings
and not exceeding thirty million shillings or to imprisonment
for a term not less than three years and not exceeding ﬁve
years or to both; and

(b) a body corporate, to a ﬁne of not less than ﬁﬁy million shillings

and not exceeding one hundred million shillings.

24.-(1) A person being the owner, manager or incharge of health
care facility or medical insurance whether public or private shall facilitate
access to health care services to persons living with HIV and AIDS
without discrimination on the basis of their status.

(2) The Ministry shall, where resources allow, take necessary steps
to ensure the availability of ARVs and other health care services and
medicines to persons living with HIV and AIDS and those exposed to
risk of HIV infection.

25.-(1) The Ministry shall regulate the care and treatment of HIV
infected pregnant women, mothers infected with HIV while giving birth

and measures to reduce HIV transmission from mother to child.

(2) In an endeavor to prevent the mother to child transmission
of HIV-

(a) trained and authorized persons shall provide counselling services
to HIV infected pregnant and breast feeding women and to
men responsible for the pregnancies or spouses respectively;

(b) health care facilities shall monitor, provide treatment and
apply measures necessary to reduce HIV transmission from

'mother to child.
(c) prevention of mother to child transmission of HIV health

services should be parent friendly.

26. A health practitioner who is exposed to or infected with HIV in
the course of rendering health care services to a person living with HIV/
AIDS shall be entitled to-

(a) post exposure prophylaxis;

(b) treatment or access to continuum of care in case of HIV
diagnosis; and

(c) compensation for any injury directly resulting from infection
with HIV.

27 .—(1) All statements or information regarding the cure of HIV
and AIDS shall be subjected to scientiﬁc veriﬁcation before they are

announced.

2008 15

Access
to health
care
facility

Prevention
of trans-
mission
from

mother to
child

Post
exposure

pr0phy-
laxis

Mislead-
ing
informa-
tion or
statement

