N0. 28 HIV and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008

(b) establishing the criteria for evaluating and funding the
submitted proposals;

(c) awarding best research proposals fellowships of at least ten
million Tanzanian shillings and maximum of ﬁfty million
Tanzanian shillings;

(d) advertising the fellowship programmes on an annual, basis;

. and

(e) mobilizing resources for the Committee.

(2) The functions, activities and other expenses of the Committee
shall be funded by the Ministry.

38.—(1)All proposals seeking funding support from the Committee
shall be required to submit evidence of having obtained ethical clearance
of their proposals from the National Research Ethics Committee of the
NIMR, COSTECH or other research ethics bodies established under
any written laws.

(2) All research on HIV and AIDS involving local and multinational

researchers shall require approval by the National HIV and AIDS
Research Fellowship Committee.

39. For the purpose of research conducted under this Part every
international research team shall include a national counterpart who

shall be responsible for that study in Tanzania.

40.-(1) The Committee shall establish a mechanism for monitoring
researches funded by the Committee by requiring a quarterly or six
monthly report from persons awarded fellowships.

(2) After a research fellowship project has been completed, the
research fellow shall be required to submit the ﬁnal report of activities
and budgeted expenditure to the Committee and copies of all publications

originating from the funded project to NACP, TACAIDS and NIMR.

41.-(1) The Ministry in collaboration with the relevant institutions
may institute trials on HIV and AIDS vaccines, medicines and other
related bio- products within the country, provided that such trials shall
not endanger the health of persons undergoing such trials.

(2) A person shall not undertake HIV and AIDS related bio-medical
research on another person or on any tissue or blood removed from
such person unless-

(a) there is informed consent of that other person; or

2008 19

Ethics
clearance

Research

by
Intema-
tional

teams

Research
Monitor-
1118

Vaccine
trials and
research
on
persons

