24 No. 28 HIV and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008 2008

Absent
members to
be
represented

Quorum

Decision of
the
Committee

Minutes of
the
Meetings

Validity of
proceedings

Committee
may
regulate its
proceed-
ings

(2) The Chairman or in his absence the Vice Chairman, may at any time convene an
extraordinary meeting of the Committee, upon a written request by the majority of
members in ofﬁce.

(3) The Chairman or in his absence the Vlce-Chairman, shall preside at every meeting
of the Committee and in the absence of both the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman, the
members present shall appoint a member from amongst themselves to preside the meeting.

3. If a member of the Committee who is a member by virtue of his ofﬁce is unable
for any reason to attend any meeting of the Committee, be may nominate another
person from his organization to represent him in the meeting.

4. The quorum at any meeting of the Committee shall be half of the members in ofﬁce.

5.-(1) Subject to sub-paragraph (2), matters proposed to be deliberated upon at a
meeting of the Committee shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members
present, and in the event of an equality of votes, the person presiding over the meeting
shall have a casting vote in addition to his deliberative vote.

(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph (1), where the Chairman so
directs a decision may be made by the Committee without a meeting by circulation of
the relevant papers among the members, and the expression of the views of the members
in writing, shall constitute the decision of the Committee, but any member may require
that the decision be deferred and the subject matter be considered at a meeting of the
Committee.

6.-( 1) The Committee shall cause to be recorded and kept minutes of all business
conducted or transacted at the meeting and the minutes of each meeting of the Committee
shall be read and conﬁrmed or amended and conﬁrmed at the next meeting of the
Committee and signed by the person presiding and the Secretary to the meeting.

(2) Any minutes purporting to be signed by the person presiding and the Secretary
at a meeting of the Committee shall, in the absence of proof of error, be deemed to be a

correct record of the meeting whose minutes they purport to be.

7. The validity of any act or proceeding of the Committee shall not be affected by
any vacancy among its members or by any defect in the appointment of any of them.

8. Subject to the provisions of this Schedule, the Committee may regulate its own
proceedings.

Passed in the National Assembly on 1st Fe 0‘

    

Cler 0 Na ional Assembly

23

