 

i«;

No. 28 HI V and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008

6.—(1) Every ministry, department, agency, local government authority,
parastatal organization, institution whether public or private, shall design
and implement gender and disability responsive HIV and AIDS plans in
its respective anea and such plans shall be mainstreamed and implemented
within the activities of such sector.

(2) Every FBO shall undertake deliberate efforts in prevention, care
and control of HIV and AIDS through special plans and programmes in
its activities.

(3) Civil societies and private organizations shall, in collaboration with
the Government, design and implement plans and programmes aimed at
or geared towards prevention, care of patients and control of HIV and
AIDS in their respective areas.

(4) Every sector preparing a plan or programme under this section
shall before implementation of such plan or programme, submit them to
TACAIDS for coordination and advice.

PART III
PUBLIC EDUCATION AND PROGRAMMES ON HIV AND AIDS

7. — (1) It shall be the responsibility of the Ministry to consult the
respective local government authority and other relevant stakeholders
with a view to formulating education a programmes relating to prohibition
of stigma and discrimination against persons living with or taking care of
patients living with HIV and AIDS.

(2) For purposes of this section the term “stakeholders” includes the
youths.

8.-(1) The Ministry, health practitioners, workers in the public and
private sectors and NGOs, shall for the purpose of providing HIV and
AIDS education to the public, disseminate information regarding HIV
and AIDS to the public.

(2) Dissemination of HIV and AIDS education and information shall
form part of the delivery of health care services by health practitioners
and workers in the public and private sectors.

(3) Every institution providing HIV and AIDS information whether
public or private shall ensure that the information to the public is provided
in appropriate format, technology and is accessible to disabled persons.

9. Every employer in consultation with the Ministry shall establish
and coordinate a workplace programme on HIV and AIDS for employees
under his control and such programme shall include provision of gender

2008 9

Roles of
sectors

Public
education
and pro-
grammes
on HIV
and
AIDS

13' . _
tion of
HIV and
AIDS
informa-
tion

HIV and
AIDS
education
in work
place

