THE HIV AND AIDS (PREVENTION AND CONTROL)
ACT, 2008

ARRANGEMENT 0F SECTIONS

Section Title
PART I
PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS

1. Short title.
2. Application.
3. Interpretation.
PART 11
GENERAL DUTIES

4. General duties.
5. The Ministry to promote safety measures and precautions.
6. Roles of sectors.

PART III
PUBLIC EDUCATION AND PROGRAMMES 0N HIV AND AIDS

7. Public education and programmes on HIV and AIDS.
8. Dissemination of HIV and AIDS information.

9. HIV and AIDS education in work place.

10. Training of health practitioners.

1 l. Donation of tissue, organ, blood or blood products.
12. Surgical, dental and similar procedures.

PART IV
TESTING AND COUNSELING

13. HIV testing.
14. Counseling.
15. Prohibition of compulsory HIV testing.
16. Test results.
PART V
CONFIDENTIALITY

17. Medical conﬁdentiality.
1 8. Exceptions to conﬁdentiality.

PART VI
HEALTH AND SUPPORT SERVICES

19. Basic health services to persons living with HIV and AIDS.
20. Programmes on survival, life skills and palliative services.
21 . Prevention of transmission.

2 No. 28 HI V and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008 2008

22. Prevention and control of STIs.

23. Condoms.

24. Access to health care facility.

25. Prevention of transmission from mother to child.
26. Post exposure prophylaxis.

27. Misleading information or statement.

PART VII
STIGMA AND DISCRIMINATION

28. Prohibition of discriminatory laws, policies and practices.

29. Restriction of health practitioners to stigmatize or discriminate.
30. Prohibition of other forms of discrimination.

31. Prohibition of stigma and discrimination.

32. Offences relating to stigma and discrimination.

PART VIII
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF PERSONS LIVING WITH HIV AND AIDS

33. Rights and obligations of persons living with HIV and AIDS, orphans
etc.

34. Access to education and basic health services.
35. Prohibition of misuse of aid by NGOs, CBOs, FBOs, Private
Organisations, public Institutions etc.

PART IX
ESTABLISHMENT OF RESEARCH COMMITTEE

36. National HIV and AIDS Research Fellowship Committee.
37. Functions of the Committee.

38. Ethics clearance.

39. Research by International teams. '

40. Research monitoring.

41. Vaccine trials and research on persons.

42. Dissemination of research ﬁndings.

PART X
MONITORING AND EVALUATION

43. Monitoring.
44. Reporting by health care facility.
45. Diagnoses and reporting.

N0. 28 HIV and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008 2008 3

PART XI
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

46. Offence relating to breach of conﬁdentiality.

47. Offences relating to spreading HIV.

48. Offences relating to breach of safe practices leading to spreading
HIV.

49. Penalty for offence relating to obstruction.
50. General penalty.

PART XII
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

5 1. Complaints.
52. Regulations.
53. Prohibition of compulsion.
54. Amendments of Schedule.

SCHEDULE

N0. 28 HI V and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008 2008 5

 

N0. 28 OF 2008

I ASSENT,

  

President

“Weﬁoog .............

An Act to provide for prevention, treatment, care, support
and control of HIV and AIDS, for promotion of public
health in relation to HIV and AIDS; to provide for
appropriate treatment, care and support using available
resources to people living with or at risk of HIV and AIDS
and to provide for related matters.

ENACTED by Parliament of the United Republic of Tanzania.

PART I
PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS

1. This Act may be cited as the HIV and AIDS (Prevention and Short
Control) Act, 2008 and shall come into force on a date the Minister may, title
by Notice published in the Gazette, appoint.

2. This Act shall apply to Mainland Tanzania. Applica-
tion

3. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires - Interpre-
tation

“AIDS” means Acquired Immuno-Deﬁciency Syndrome, which is a
condition characterised by a combination of signs and symptoms,
caused by HIV which attacks and weakens the body’s immune
system, making the afﬂicted individual susceptible to other life-
threatening infections;

Cap.379

6 No. 28

Cap.226

Cap.287
and288

HI V and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008 2008

“AIDS Committee” has the meaning ascribed to it under the Tanzania
Connnissionfor AIDS Act;

“ARVs” means Anti Retroviral Drugs;

“CBO” means a Commiinity Based Organization;

“Committee” means the National HIV and AIDS Research Fellowship
Committee established under section 36;

“COSTECH” means Commission for Science and Technology established
by-the Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology Act;

“court” means the High Court and courts subordinate thereto with
exception to primary court;

“F130” means 3 Faith Based Organisation;

“heath practitioner” means any person trained to care for patients;

“HIV negative” means absence of HIV or HIV antibodies upon HIV
testing;

“HIV positive” means presence of HIV infection as documented by
the presence of HIV or HIV antibodies in the sample being
tested;

“HIV testing” means any laboratory procedure done on an individual to
determine the presence or absence of HIV infection;

“HIV transmission” means the transfer of HIV from one infected person
to an uninfected person, most commonly through sexual intercourse,
blood transfusion, sharing of intravenous needles, during pregnancy
or breast feeding;

“HIV and AIDS monitoring and evaluation framework” means
documentation and analysis of the number of HIV and AIDS
infections and the pattern of its spread;

“HIV and AIDS prevention and control” means measures aimed at
protecting non infected person from contracting HIV and minimizing
the impact of the condition of persons living with HIV;

“Human Immuno-deﬁciency Virus (HIV)” means the virus which causes
AIDS;

“informed consent” means the voluntary agreement of a person to undergo
or be subjected to a procedure based on full information, whether
such agreement is written, conveyed verbally or indirectly expressed;

“learning institutions” includes primary and secondary schools, colleges,
universities and other higher learning institutions;

No. 28 HI V and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008

“local government authority” means the local government authority
established under the Local Government (District Authorities) Act
and the Local Government (Urban Authorities) Act;

“Minister” means the Minister responsible for health;

“Ministry” means the ministry responsible for health;

“NACP” means National AIDS Control Programme, established within
the Ministry; -

“NGO” shall have the meaning ascribed to it under the Non Governmental
Organizations Act;

“NIMR” means the National Institute for Medical Research established
by the National Institute for Medical Research Act;

“positive prevention” means the provision of public health promotion to
persons living with HIV and AIDS;

“Private Health Laboratory Board” has the meaning ascribed to it under
the Private Health Laboratories (Regulation) Act;

“private health laboratory” shall have the meaning as ascribed to it under
the Private Health Laboratories (Regulation) Act;

“private sector” includes informal sector;

“research incentives” means compensation for time or other resources
expended by a human subj ect participating or taking part in a clinical trial;

“Secretary” means the secretary to the Committee referred to under
section 36;

“sexual partner” means a person involved in sex;

“Stigma” is an attitude of condenscension or disrespect towards another
person because one knows or suspects that person is infected with
HIV, or because that person has close relationship with a person
known or suspected to be infected with HIV;

“stigmatize” means -

(a) to vilify, or to incite hatred, ridicule or contempt against a person
or group of persons on the grounds of an attn'bute of the person
or of members of the group living with HIV and AIDS, by
publication, distribution or dissemination to the public; or

(b) the making of any communication to the public, including
any arctic or gesture, that is threatening, abusive, insulting,
degrading, demeaning, defamatory, disrespectful,
embarrassing, critical, provocative or offensive;

“STIs” means Sexually Transmitted Infections;

“TACAIDS” means the Tanzania Commission for AIDS established

under the Tanzania Commission for AIDS Act.

PART 11
GENERAL DUTIES

4.—( 1) Every person, institution and organization living, registered or
operating in Tanzania shall, be under the general duty to-

2008 7

Cap.56

Cap.59

Cap.136

Cap.136

Cap.379

General
duties

8 No. 28

The
Ministry
to
promote
safety
measures
and
precau-
tions

HIV and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008 2008

(a) promote public awareness on causes, modes of transmission,
consequences, prevention and control of HIV and AIDS;

(b) reduce:
(i) the spread of HIV and AIDS;
(ii) prevalence of STIs in the population;
(iii) adverse effects of HIV and AIDS;
(c) protect rights of the orphans by -
(i) providing health care and social services;
(ii) prohibiting compulsory HIV testing unless provided for
under this Act;
(iii) ﬁghting stigma and discrimination;
(d) discourage negative traditions and usages which may
enhance HIV and AIDS spread in the community;

(e) promote all traditions and usages which may reduce the
transmission and prevalence of the infection in the
community;

(1) increase access, care and support to persons living with
HIV and AIDS from community or health care facilities.

(2) The Government, political, religious, traditional leaders and
employers in the private sector shall-
(a) integrate or prioritise on HIV and AIDS in their proceedings
and public appearances;

(b) advocate against stigma and discrimination of people living
with HIV and AIDS.

(3) Every person, institution, organization, Government, political,
religious, traditional leaders and employers in the private sector
discharging a duty under subsection (1), and (2) shall be under obligation
to consult or liaise with TACAIDS for purpose of ensuring that resources
are evenly distributed within Tanzania in order to-

(a) avoid concentration of such resources in one geographical
area; and

(b) initiate pre-informed activities intended to prevent and control
HIV and AIDS.

5. The Ministry shall promote utmost safety and universal precautions
in invasive medical or non medical practices and procedures in order to
reduce the risk of transmission of HIV and AIDS.

 

i«;

No. 28 HI V and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008

6.—(1) Every ministry, department, agency, local government authority,
parastatal organization, institution whether public or private, shall design
and implement gender and disability responsive HIV and AIDS plans in
its respective anea and such plans shall be mainstreamed and implemented
within the activities of such sector.

(2) Every FBO shall undertake deliberate efforts in prevention, care
and control of HIV and AIDS through special plans and programmes in
its activities.

(3) Civil societies and private organizations shall, in collaboration with
the Government, design and implement plans and programmes aimed at
or geared towards prevention, care of patients and control of HIV and
AIDS in their respective areas.

(4) Every sector preparing a plan or programme under this section
shall before implementation of such plan or programme, submit them to
TACAIDS for coordination and advice.

PART III
PUBLIC EDUCATION AND PROGRAMMES ON HIV AND AIDS

7. — (1) It shall be the responsibility of the Ministry to consult the
respective local government authority and other relevant stakeholders
with a view to formulating education a programmes relating to prohibition
of stigma and discrimination against persons living with or taking care of
patients living with HIV and AIDS.

(2) For purposes of this section the term “stakeholders” includes the
youths.

8.-(1) The Ministry, health practitioners, workers in the public and
private sectors and NGOs, shall for the purpose of providing HIV and
AIDS education to the public, disseminate information regarding HIV
and AIDS to the public.

(2) Dissemination of HIV and AIDS education and information shall
form part of the delivery of health care services by health practitioners
and workers in the public and private sectors.

(3) Every institution providing HIV and AIDS information whether
public or private shall ensure that the information to the public is provided
in appropriate format, technology and is accessible to disabled persons.

9. Every employer in consultation with the Ministry shall establish
and coordinate a workplace programme on HIV and AIDS for employees
under his control and such programme shall include provision of gender

2008 9

Roles of
sectors

Public
education
and pro-
grammes
on HIV
and
AIDS

13' . _
tion of
HIV and
AIDS
informa-
tion

HIV and
AIDS
education
in work
place

 

10 No. 28 HIV and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008 2008

responsive HIV and AIDS education, distribution of condoms and
support to people living with HIV and AIDS.

Training 10. The Ministry shall for the purpose of ensuring prevention and

0f heglth control of HIV and AIDS to the public, develop and conduct programmes

3:12;; to train health practitioners on universal precaution measures on HIV/
AIDS and STIs and treatment procedures and such programmes shall,
using available resources be adopted by health institutions.

Donation 11.-(1) A person may on his own motion, volunteer to donate a

of tissue, organ, blood or blood products to the recognized laboratory or

tissues, institution.

organs,

210°: 0r (2) No laboratory or institution shall accept a donation of tissue or

p :31] ct s organ, whether such donation is gratuitous or not, unless a sample from
the donor has tested negative for HIV.

(3) No laboratory or institution shall transfuse blood or blood products
whether such blood or blood products are donated gratuitously or not,
unless a sample from that donation has tested negative for HIV.

(4) Any blood, blood product, tissue or organ which has been tested
positive for HIV shall be disposed of immediately and properly.

(5) Any person who contravenes the provisions of this section
commits an offence and upon conviction shall be liable-

(a) in case of an individual to a ﬁne of not less than two hundred
thousand shillings and not exceeding one million shillings or
to imprisonment for a term of not less than six months and
not exceeding twelve months; or

(b) in case of a laboratory or an institution to a ﬁne not less than
ﬁve million shillings and not exceeding ten million shillings.
Surgical, 12.-(1) Every health practitioner shall during surgical, dental and
dental similar procedures have a duty to ensure that-
and

similar (a) parenteral exposure (sharp objects) are handled with care
procedures during performance of any procedure;
(b) at all levels of health care, delivery services, and in case of
accident, he uses the necessary tools such as gloves, goggles
and gowns;

No. 28 HI V and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008 2008 11

(c) he handles and disposes of used syringes and other material
used in blood testing; and '
(d) he handles and disposes of in an appropriate manner body

ﬂuids or wastes of persons known or believed to be infected
with HIV.

(2) A person who is the owner, manager or the in charge of health
care facility shall have a duty to ensure-

(a) the provision of post exposure prophylaxis;

(b) the provision of necessary tools such as gloves, goggles and
gowns;

(c) appropriate handling and disposition of used syringes,
materials used in blood testing and body ﬂuids or wastes of
persons known or believed to be infected with HIV.

(3) A person who contravenes the provisions of this section commits
an offence and upon conviction shall be liable to a ﬁne of not less than
ﬁve hundred thousand shillings.

PART IV
TESTING AND COUNSELLING

13.—(l) For the purposes of facilitating HIV testing, every public HIV
health care facility and voluntary counselling and HIV testing centre ”Sting
recognized by the NACP shall be an HIV testing center for the purpose
of this Act.

(2) The Private Health Laboratory Board may, by Order published in
the Gazette, accredit any private laboratory to be an HIV testing center.

(3) Every health practitioner perfouning or otherwise involved in the
performance of an HIV test shall take all measures to ensure that-

(a) the testing process is carried out promptly and efﬁciently;
and

(b) the result of the HIV test is communicated in accordance
with this Act.

(4) A person shall not undergo HIV testing except in a center provided
for under this Part.

(5) For the purposes of this section HIV testing centre includes any
centre established in any place for the purposes of HIV testing.

12 N0. 28 HI V and AIDS ﬂ’revention and Control) 2008 2008

Coun-
selling

Prohibi-
tion of

mﬁsuy
HIV

testing

Test
results

14. Any person who is the owner, manager or incharge of a testing
center shall ensure that the center is physically accessible by disabled
persons and there is a trained and authorized person to provide pre and
post HIV test counselling to a person undergoing HIV test, and where

feasible, to any other person likely to be affected by the results.

15,-(1) Every person residing in Tanzania may on his own motion
volunteer to undergo HIV testing.

(2) A child or a person with inability to comprehend the result may
undergo HIV testing after a written consent of a parent or recognized

guardian.
(3) A person shall not be compelled to undergo HIV testing.

(4) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (3), no consent
shall be required on HIV testing-
(a) under an order of the Court;
(b) on the donor of human organs and tissues; and
(c) to sexual offenders.

(5) Every pregnant woman and the man responsible for the pregnancy
or spouse and every person attending a health care facility shall be
counselled and offered voluntary HIV testing.

(6) All health practitioners, traditional and alternative health
practitioners, traditional birth attendants and any other person attending
patients shall be encouraged to undergo HIV testing.

(7) Any health practitioner who compels any person to undergo
HIV testing or procures HIV testing to another person without the
knowledge of that other person commits an offence.

(8) Without prejudice to the preceding subsections, a medical
practitioner responsible for the treatment of a person may undertake
HIV test in respect of that person without the consent of the person if-

(a) the person is unconscious and unable to give consent; and

(b) the medical practitioner reasonably believes that such a test
is clinically necessary or desirable in the interest of that
person.

16.-(1) The results of an HIV test shall be conﬁdential and shall be
released only to the person tested.

No. 28 HIV and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008

(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the results of an HIV test may
be released to-
(a) in case of a child, his parent or recognized guardian;
(b) in case of person with inability to comprehend the results,
his spouse or his recognized guardian;
(c) a spouse or a sexual partner of an HIV tested person; or
(d) the court, if applicable.

PART V
CONFIDENTIALITY

17.—-—(1) All health practitioners, workers, employers, recruitment
agencies, insurance companies, data recorders, sign language interpreters,
legal guardians and other custodians of any medical records, ﬁles, data
or test results shall observe conﬁdentiality in the handling of all medical
information and documents, particularly the identity and status ofpersons
living with HIV and AIDS.

(2) A person who received results under section 16 shall be obliged
to observe conﬁdentiality in respect of the HIV result received by him
under that section.

18. The medical conﬁdentiality shall not be considered breached in -

(a) complying with reportorial requirements in conjunction with
the monitoring and evaluation programmes;

(b) informing other health practitioners directly involved or about
to be involved in the treatment or care of a person living
with HIV and AIDS;

(c) responding to an order of the Court over legal proceedings
where the main issue is HIV status of an individual; or

(d) giving information to the appointed member of the deceased’s
family.

PART VI
HEALTH AND SUPPORT SERVICES

19.-(1) The Government shall, using available resources ensure that,
every person living with HIV and AIDS, vulnerable children and orphans
are accorded with basic health services.

(2) Every CBO, Private Organization and PEG dealing with HIV
and AIDS matters shall in consultation with the local govermnent authority
in the area of its jurisdiction, provide community based HIV and AIDS
prevention, support and care services.

2008 13

Medical
conﬁ-

dentiality

Exceptions
to con-
ﬁdentiality

Basic
health
services
to
persons
living
with HIV
and AIDS

14 No. 28 HI V and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008 2008

PrO- 20. The Ministry shall, in collaboration with other ministries prepare

EITMCS programmes and conduct training for persons living with HIV and

survival, AIDS on-

life skills (a) their survival needs;

and. . (b)1ife skills; and

palllatlve _ . .

services (0) formation of support groups for the purpose of prov1d1ng
palliative services and care.

Ptevenu'on

of trans- 21,-(1) Any person who has knowledge of being infected with HIV

miSSion after being tested shall-

(a) immediately inform his spouse or sexual partner of the fact;
and

(b) take all reasonable measures and precautions to prevent the
transmission of HIV to others.

(2) The person referred to under subsection (1) shall inform his
spouse or his sexual partner of the risk of becoming infected if he has
sex with such person unless that other person knows that fact.

(3) Any person who abuse his spouse or sexual partner either verbally,
physically or by conduct in connection with compliance with the provisions
of this Act commits an offence and shall upon conviction be liable to a
ﬁne of not less than ﬁve hundred thousand shillings and not exceeding
one million shillings or to imprisonment for a term of not less than three
months and not more than six months or to both.

Prevention 22. The Ministry Shall-

contml (a) ensure that STIs services are strengthened; and

of STIs (b) create public awareness on STIs as far as it relates to
transmission of HIV and AIDS.

Condoms 23.-(1) The Ministry shall quantify requirement of condoms in

Tanzania by espousing different stakeholders, mobilizing resources
required for procurement of condoms generally with a view to ensuring
availability of condoms of standard quality in Tanzania.

(2) No condoms shall be manufactured or imported to Tanzania unless
the condoms conform with the standards provided by the Tanzania Bureau
of Standards and where possible, the condoms should bear the
information relating to the condoms and be in braille print.

No. 28 HIV and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008

(3) Any person who contravenes the provisions of subsection (2)
shall, on conviction be liable in case of -

(a) an individual, to a ﬁne of not less than ten million shillings
and not exceeding thirty million shillings or to imprisonment
for a term not less than three years and not exceeding ﬁve
years or to both; and

(b) a body corporate, to a ﬁne of not less than ﬁﬁy million shillings

and not exceeding one hundred million shillings.

24.-(1) A person being the owner, manager or incharge of health
care facility or medical insurance whether public or private shall facilitate
access to health care services to persons living with HIV and AIDS
without discrimination on the basis of their status.

(2) The Ministry shall, where resources allow, take necessary steps
to ensure the availability of ARVs and other health care services and
medicines to persons living with HIV and AIDS and those exposed to
risk of HIV infection.

25.-(1) The Ministry shall regulate the care and treatment of HIV
infected pregnant women, mothers infected with HIV while giving birth

and measures to reduce HIV transmission from mother to child.

(2) In an endeavor to prevent the mother to child transmission
of HIV-

(a) trained and authorized persons shall provide counselling services
to HIV infected pregnant and breast feeding women and to
men responsible for the pregnancies or spouses respectively;

(b) health care facilities shall monitor, provide treatment and
apply measures necessary to reduce HIV transmission from

'mother to child.
(c) prevention of mother to child transmission of HIV health

services should be parent friendly.

26. A health practitioner who is exposed to or infected with HIV in
the course of rendering health care services to a person living with HIV/
AIDS shall be entitled to-

(a) post exposure prophylaxis;

(b) treatment or access to continuum of care in case of HIV
diagnosis; and

(c) compensation for any injury directly resulting from infection
with HIV.

27 .—(1) All statements or information regarding the cure of HIV
and AIDS shall be subjected to scientiﬁc veriﬁcation before they are

announced.

2008 15

Access
to health
care
facility

Prevention
of trans-
mission
from

mother to
child

Post
exposure

pr0phy-
laxis

Mislead-
ing
informa-
tion or
statement

16 No. 28 H] V and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008 2008

Prohibition
of discri-
minatory
laws,
policies
and
practice

Restiiction
of health
practi-
tioners to
stigmatize
or discri-
minate

Prohibi-
tion of
other
forms of
discri-
mination

Prohibi-
tion of
stigma
and
discri-
mination

Offences
relating
to stigma
and
discri-
mination

(2) Publication of statements or information referred to under subsection
(1) shall be attached with both evidence of pre- and post-cure HIV test results.

(3) A person who makes or causes to be made any misleading
statement or information regarding curing, preventing or controlling HIV
and AIDS contrary to this section commits an offence and shall be liable
on conviction to a ﬁne of not less than one million shillings or to
imprisonment for a term of not less than six months or to both.

PART VII
STIGMA AND DISCRIMINATION

28. A person shall not formulate a policy, enact any law or act in a
manner that discriminates directly or by its implication persons living
with HIV and AIDS, orphans or their families.

29. Any health practitioner who deals with persons living with HIV
and AIDS shall provide health services without any kind of stigma or
discrimination.

30. A person shall not -

(a) deny any person admission, participation into services or
expel that other person from any institution;

(b) deny or restrict any person to travel within or outside Tanzania;

(c) deny any person employment opportunity;

((1) deny or restrict any person to live anywhere; or

(e) deny or restrict the right of any person to residence, on the
grounds of the person’s actual, perceived or suspected HIV

and AIDS status.

31. A person shall not stigmatize or discriminate in any manner any
other person on the grounds of such other person’s actual, perceived or
suspected HIV and AIDS status.

32. Any person who contravenes any provision under this Part
commits an offence and on conviction shall be liable to a ﬁne of not less
than two million shillings or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
one year or to both.

No. 28 HI V and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008

PART VIII
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATons OF PERSONS LIVING WITH HIV AND AIDS

33.—(1)Any person living with HIV and AIDS shall using available
resources have -

(a) a right to the highest attainable standard of physical and
mental health; and

(b) a right to treatment of opportunistic infections.

(2) Any person living with HIV and AIDS shall, subject to the
provisions of subsection (1), have an obligation to-

(a) protect others from infection; and
(b) share in scientiﬁc advancement and its beneﬁts.

34.—(1) Every local government authority, shall design, formulate,
establish and coordinate mechanisms and strategic plans for ensuring
that the most vulnerable children within its respective area are afforded
means to access education, basic health care and livelihood services.

(2) The Minister may, in consultation with the Minister responsible
for local government, make regulations setting out criteria for identifying
the most vulnerable children referred to under subsection (1).

(3) For the purpose of this section, the term “most vulnerable children”
includes orphans.

35.-(1) Every body corporate, NGO, CBO, FBO public institution
or Private Organization and any person receiving aid or other kind of
assistance for the purpose of providing preventive, research, treatment,
support or care to persons living with HIV and AIDS, widows, widowers,
orphans or the most vulnerable chidren shall ensure that the aid and
assistance received is used for that purpose.

(2) Any body corporate, NGO, CBO, FBO or Private Organization
which misuses any aid shall be liable on conviction—

(a) in case of an individual, to imprisonment for a term of not
less than three years and not exceeding ﬁve years or
conﬁscation of property worth the value of the aid or
assistance received and refund of the misused funds;

(b) in case of an NGO, CEO or FBO Private organization a
body corporate, to a ﬁne of not less than ﬁve million shillings
and not exceeding ﬁﬁy million shillings or conﬁscation of

propert woﬁh the value of aid or assistance received and
refund of the misused funds.

2008 17

Rights
and
obligations
of
persons
living
with HIV/
AIDS,
orphans,
etc.

Access to
education
and basic
health
care
services

Prohibi-
tion of
misuse of
aid by
NGOs,
FBOs,
CBOs, in
public
institutions
etc.

18 No.

National
HIV and
AIDS
Research
Fellow-
ship
Com-
mittee

Functions

of the
Committee

28 HIV and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008 2008

(3) Any body corporate NGO, CBO, FBO or Private Organization
which is convicted pursuant to subsection (1) may be deregistered from
the Register of body corporate, NGOs, CBO, FBO or Private

Organization as the case may be.

PART IX
ESTABLISHMENT OF RESEARCH COMMITTEE

36.—(1) There shall be established a Committee to be known as the
National HIV and AIDS Research Fellowship Committee.

(2) The Committee shall comprise of the following members—

(a) the Chairman;

(b) one member from the National AIDS Control Programme;
(c) one member from TACAIDS;
(d) one member representing higher learning institutions;
(e) one member representing the Attorney General;
(1) one member representing private HIV and AIDS research
bodies; »
(g) one member from NIMR;
(h) one member from COSTECH;
(i) one member from Muhimbili National Hospital;
0) one member represeting National Health Research Forum;
(k) one member representing the Association of Private Health
Facilities of Tanzania;
(1) one member representing organizations of people living with
HIV and AIDS; and
(m) one member from the Commission for Human Rights and

Good Governance.

(3) All members referred under subsection (2) shall be appointed by
the Minister.

(4) The Director for Preventive Services in the Ministry shall be the
Secretary to the Committee.

(5) The tenure of ofﬁce, meetings and other procedural matters of
the Committee shall be as set out in the Schedule to this Act.

37.—(1) The Committee shall be responsible for:—

(a) evaluating all proposals submitted for funding within the HIV
and AIDS Research Fellowship Programme in respect to
scientiﬁc quality, appropriateness as to priority area of
research and funding level requested;

N0. 28 HIV and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008

(b) establishing the criteria for evaluating and funding the
submitted proposals;

(c) awarding best research proposals fellowships of at least ten
million Tanzanian shillings and maximum of ﬁfty million
Tanzanian shillings;

(d) advertising the fellowship programmes on an annual, basis;

. and

(e) mobilizing resources for the Committee.

(2) The functions, activities and other expenses of the Committee
shall be funded by the Ministry.

38.—(1)All proposals seeking funding support from the Committee
shall be required to submit evidence of having obtained ethical clearance
of their proposals from the National Research Ethics Committee of the
NIMR, COSTECH or other research ethics bodies established under
any written laws.

(2) All research on HIV and AIDS involving local and multinational

researchers shall require approval by the National HIV and AIDS
Research Fellowship Committee.

39. For the purpose of research conducted under this Part every
international research team shall include a national counterpart who

shall be responsible for that study in Tanzania.

40.-(1) The Committee shall establish a mechanism for monitoring
researches funded by the Committee by requiring a quarterly or six
monthly report from persons awarded fellowships.

(2) After a research fellowship project has been completed, the
research fellow shall be required to submit the ﬁnal report of activities
and budgeted expenditure to the Committee and copies of all publications

originating from the funded project to NACP, TACAIDS and NIMR.

41.-(1) The Ministry in collaboration with the relevant institutions
may institute trials on HIV and AIDS vaccines, medicines and other
related bio- products within the country, provided that such trials shall
not endanger the health of persons undergoing such trials.

(2) A person shall not undertake HIV and AIDS related bio-medical
research on another person or on any tissue or blood removed from
such person unless-

(a) there is informed consent of that other person; or

2008 19

Ethics
clearance

Research

by
Intema-
tional

teams

Research
Monitor-
1118

Vaccine
trials and
research
on
persons

20 No. 28 HI V and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008 2008

I . . _
tion of
research
ﬁndings

Monitor-
ing

Reporting
by health
care
facility

Diagnoses
and
reporting

Offences
relating
to breach
of
conﬁden-
tiality

(b) where that other person is a child, there is informed consent
of a parent or legal guardian of the child.

(3) For the purpose of subsection (2), a person whose consent is
sought to be obtained, shall be adequately informed of the aims, methods,
anticipated beneﬁts and potential hazards and discomforts of the research.

(4) The person who is the subject of the research shall be adequately
provided with compensation as far as ethical regulations are concerned.

42 .-( 1) The public and private instututions shall maintain inventory of all
on going and completed research projects on HIV and AIDS and TACAIDS
shall compile and disseminate relevant research ﬁndings to the public.

(2) For the purpose of facilitating dissemination of research ﬁndings
under this Part, researchers shall translate or cause to be translated research
ﬁndings into Kiswahili and English languages for public consumption.

(3) Research ﬁndings shall be in appropriate format and technologies
accessible to disabled persons.

PART X
MONITORING AND EVALUATION

43. The Ministxy shall establish a comprehensive system of monitoring
and evaluation mechanisms to determine the magnitude and progression
of HIV infections and other matters relating to HIV and AIDS.

44. Every owner, manager or the incharge of a health care facility shall
adopt measures issued by the Ministry to ensure the reporting and
conﬁdentiality of any medical records and personal data relating to HIV and
AIDS including all information which may be accessed from various data.

45.-( 1) Every institution, hospital, laboratory, clinic and blood bank in
the Regions and Districts shall be required to diagnose and report HIV
and AIDS cases to the Ministry.

(2) The information referred to under subsection (1) shall be submitted
to TACAIDS for inclusion in the HIV and AIDS Monitoring and

Evaluation Framework.

PART XI
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

46. Any health practitioner or any person referred to under section
16 and 17 who—

(a) breaches medical conﬁdentiality; or

No. 28 HI V and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008

(b) unlawfully discloses information regarding HIV and AIDS
status of any person,

commits an offence, and on conviction shall be liable to a ﬁne of not less
than ﬁve hundred thousand shillings and not exceeding one million shillings
or to imprisonment for a term not less than six months and not exceeding
twelve months or to both.

47. Any'person who intentionally transmits HIV to another person
commits an offence, and on conviction shall be liable to imprisonment to

a term of not less than ﬁve years and not exceeding ten years.

48.—(1) Any person who intentionally breaches any provisions relating
to safe procedures and practices leading to spreading of HIV commits
an offence and on conviction shall be liable— ‘

(a) in case of an individual, to a ﬁne of not less than two hundred
thousand shillings and not exceeding ﬁve hundred thousand
shillings or to imprisonment to a term of not less than three
months and not exceeding six months; or

(b) in case of a health care facility, to a ﬁne of not less than
three million shillings and not exceeding ﬁve million shillings.

(2) The health care facility which is convicted pursuant to subsection
(1) may be deregistered from the Register of health care facilities.

49.—(1) It shall be an offence for any person to obstruct or prevent
any activity related to implementation of provisions of this Act in any
manner whatsoever.

(2) Any person convicted of an offence under this section, shall be
liable to a ﬁne of not less than one hundred thousand shillings and not
exceeding ﬁve hundred thousand shillings or to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding six months or both.

50. Any person, who commits any offence against the provisions of
this Act shall be liable on conviction for every such offence except wherein
any other section a speciﬁc penalty is provided to a ﬁne of not less than
two hundred thousand shillings or to imprisonment for a term of not less
than three months or to both such imprisonment and ﬁne.

2008 21

Offences
relating
to
spread-
ing HIV

Offences
relating to
breach of
safe
practices
leading to
spreading
HIV

Penalty
for
offence
relating
to

obstruction

General
penalty

22 No. 28 HI V and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008 2008

Com-
plaints

Regula—
tions

PART XII
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

51 .-( 1) Any complaint against contravention of any provision of this
Act may be lodged in writing to -

(a) the Secretary to the village, ward, district or urban AIDS
Committees as the case may be;

(b) the police station;

(c) the owner, manager or the incharge of a health care facility
concerned; or

(d) the employer.

(2) Every complainant shall be required to give all the necessary
information in relation to the complaint in question.

(3) The Minister may make regulations prescribing the mode of
lodging and handling of complaints under this Act.

52. The Minister may make regulations prescribing -

(a) circumstances under which HIV testing results may be
released to another person;

(b) methods, programmes and coordination of distribution and
use of ARVs;

(c) the manner under which professional counselling shall be
undertaken;

(d) the conduct of HIV tests, informing of the results of HIV
tests, reporting of HIV tests results and any other matter
necessary or convenient in relation to HIV tests;

(e) the preparation, maintenance and release of data relating to
transmission, status of, and persons living with HIV and
AIDS;

(f) parenteral exposure (sharp instruments), syringes and other
material used in blood testing and the manner of disposing them;

(g) precautions to be taken by health practitioners against HIV
transmission during surgical, dental, delivery services and
any other similar procedures;

(h) provision of post exposure prophylaxis at all levels of health
care services and necessary tools such as gloves, goggles
and gowns to all health practitioners and any other person
who cares for persons living with HIV and AIDS;

No. 28 HI V and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008 2008 23

(i) the manner of handling and disposing of body ﬂuids and wastes
of persons known or believed to have been infected with HIV;
(j) manner in which vaccines and other trials are to be
conducted;
(k) circumstances under which a person may be regarded to
make misleading statement to the public regarding the persons
living with HIV and AIDS, orphans and their families;
(1) matters relating to the involvement of the community in the
implementation of the provisions of this Act;
(m) circumstances under which a person may be regarded to
stigmatize and discriminate a person living with HIV and
AIDS, orphans and their families; and
(n) anything which may be provided for the better carrying out
the provisions of this Act.
53. Notwithstanding any provisions of this Act, no religious Prohibition
organization or group shall be compelled in any manner to do or not to do 0f _
anything which is against the belief of that organization or group so long compulsm

as such doing or, forbearance to do, does not contravene any provision
of any written law.

54. The Minister may, by Order published in the Gazette, amend, Amend-

vary or replace the Schedule to this Act. merits 0f
Schedule

SCHEDULE

Made under section 36(5)

 

PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF MEETINGS or THE COMMITTEE

1.-(1) The tenure of ofﬁce for the Chairman and the members of the Committee Tenure of

shall be three years and may be eligible for further one term. Ofﬁce and
election of

‘ . _ . the Vice-

(2) The members shall elect a Vice-Chalrman of the Comm1ttee from amongst thelr Chairman

number.

2.-(l) The Committee shall ordinarily meet at such times and places as it deems Meeting of

necessary for transaction of its business, but shall meet at least once in every three the _
months Comm1ttee

24 No. 28 HIV and AIDS (Prevention and Control) 2008 2008

Absent
members to
be
represented

Quorum

Decision of
the
Committee

Minutes of
the
Meetings

Validity of
proceedings

Committee
may
regulate its
proceed-
ings

(2) The Chairman or in his absence the Vice Chairman, may at any time convene an
extraordinary meeting of the Committee, upon a written request by the majority of
members in ofﬁce.

(3) The Chairman or in his absence the Vlce-Chairman, shall preside at every meeting
of the Committee and in the absence of both the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman, the
members present shall appoint a member from amongst themselves to preside the meeting.

3. If a member of the Committee who is a member by virtue of his ofﬁce is unable
for any reason to attend any meeting of the Committee, be may nominate another
person from his organization to represent him in the meeting.

4. The quorum at any meeting of the Committee shall be half of the members in ofﬁce.

5.-(1) Subject to sub-paragraph (2), matters proposed to be deliberated upon at a
meeting of the Committee shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members
present, and in the event of an equality of votes, the person presiding over the meeting
shall have a casting vote in addition to his deliberative vote.

(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph (1), where the Chairman so
directs a decision may be made by the Committee without a meeting by circulation of
the relevant papers among the members, and the expression of the views of the members
in writing, shall constitute the decision of the Committee, but any member may require
that the decision be deferred and the subject matter be considered at a meeting of the
Committee.

6.-( 1) The Committee shall cause to be recorded and kept minutes of all business
conducted or transacted at the meeting and the minutes of each meeting of the Committee
shall be read and conﬁrmed or amended and conﬁrmed at the next meeting of the
Committee and signed by the person presiding and the Secretary to the meeting.

(2) Any minutes purporting to be signed by the person presiding and the Secretary
at a meeting of the Committee shall, in the absence of proof of error, be deemed to be a

correct record of the meeting whose minutes they purport to be.

7. The validity of any act or proceeding of the Committee shall not be affected by
any vacancy among its members or by any defect in the appointment of any of them.

8. Subject to the provisions of this Schedule, the Committee may regulate its own
proceedings.

Passed in the National Assembly on 1st Fe 0‘

    

Cler 0 Na ional Assembly

23

